rfcs: in-place binary post-ops (#5740)
oneapi-src/oneDNN: rfcs/20260803-inplace-binary-post-ops/README.md

# In-place binary post-ops: sum -> binary_add(dst), and more

## Overview

The Sum post-op in oneDNN is not like the other post-ops: it performs a binary
operation but requires no right-hand-side buffer, instead taking its input from
DST. This behavior can be replicated in all of the Binary post-ops, extending
the buffer semantics of Sum to all other Binaries and eventually deprecating

> Sum.

Reviewer: This RFC doesn't clarify how scales, zero points and `dt` arguments should be handled for the sum post op. I don't think the binary post op can implement the sum operation as it is currently defined.

This RFC also explicitly states that `dt` cannot be different.

> When `inplace = true`, `user_src1_desc` should equal the memory descriptor of `DNNL_ARG_DST` both in shape and in type

The two operations are semantically different. While there is some overlap, I don't think it is sufficient for one to replace the other. This is my biggest blocker with the current proposal.

Author: I can just drop the claim about in-place Binary replacing Sum, since this isn't the main point of this RFC.

Reviewer: I think the reason why `sum` has quantization parameters is that it is in place. Even if we drop the claim, the question is still relevant. The user may need to apply the zero point and scale to the destination before multiplying it with the result of the operation.

Author: With immediate ZPs and scales, a separate `eltwise_linear` would fit the bill no problem.

Reviewer: Please correct me if I am mistaken, but an `eltwise` post op would be applied to the accumulator rather than `dst`. That would give us something like
`dst[:] = dst[:] + eltwise(Op(...))`

instead of

`dst[:] = scale * (dst[:] - zp) + Op(...)`

Author: That is correct, but there exists a different possiblity.
`D + (αC + β) = α(D/α + C) + β = linear(binary_add(linear(D, 1/α, 0), C), α, β)`

Reviewer: Yeah, that works. The only concern is whether we stay within the accumulator range (likely yes for f32), but can it become an issue for lower precision data types?

Author: With Intel GPUs, the post-op type is always FP32 — both in JIT and in CL.
Using in-place `binary_add` with immediate scales backed by shorter-type accumulators could become problematic, but right now IMO this concern is a bit too far-fetched.

Reviewer: Okay, I just wanted to check because it seems like some GPU primitives support f16 accumulator data type

Author: Pooling, for one, sure does, but accumulator and post-op accumulator are two different concepts on the GPU.

Reviewer 2: > I can just drop the claim about in-place Binary replacing Sum, since this isn't the main point of this RFC.

I think we should do so, as RFC as written is not about deprecating sum and the current proposal as it is written won't cover it.

Author: It's already the case, I removed that claim.

Author: Documented in Caveats>Quantization, details in the [other thread](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3817799766).

On accumulator precision: the decompositions assume an `f32` post-op accumulator, which in practice is the only option for GPU as of now, while a sub-`f32` one is still hypothetical: I did experiment with one in JIT GPU Pooling, but it meant dropping the standard JIT epilogue builder wherever it was needed, so it isn't something the library offers today. I'd rather not specify behavior for a configuration that doesn't exist yet — the `f32` caveat in the RFC covers everything currently reachable.
@densamoilov, can you confirm that's also the case on CPU?

Reviewer: We support f16/bf16 accumulators: https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5341

So the trick may not work for those accumulator data types. But since we seem to be adding new algos to isolate the feature I think it should be fine. And we can consider it just as a limitation of the low precision accumulator data types.

Reviewer 2: @hidefromkgb let's fold the last statement into ~quantization caveats section of the RFC and resolve this thread.

Author: @mzhukova Stated as a limitation of the low-precision accumulator, with the side note that it constrains the workaround but not the algorithm.
Resolving.

The need for this, beside purely architectural, is also practical: many modern
LLMs like LLaMa, especially in OpenVINO, contain 3-GEMM subgraphs that can
benefit from a variant of Sum that performs multiplication instead of addition,

> potentially saving dozens of % of E2E VRAM compared to regular binary_mul which

Reviewer: Could you please share the data or explain how you arrived at this number?

As I understand it, an in place `mul` saves a single activation buffer, which is relatively small, maybe around 50 MB. In contrast, the weights and KV cache can occupy several gigabytes. Saving dozens of percent of the total VRAM usage sounds ambitious.

This feature has a real maintenance cost so it would be helpful to quantify the expected benefit more accurately.

Author: Here's the [estimate](https://jira.devtools.intel.com/browse/MFDNN-14598?focusedId=30466639&page=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.issuetabpanels:comment-tabpanel#comment-30466639) and here's the [logic](https://jira.devtools.intel.com/browse/MFDNN-14598?focusedId=30257113&page=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.issuetabpanels:comment-tabpanel#comment-30257113) behind it.

Reviewer: Thank you for the data. I assumed M to be smaller and that framework optimizes memory use.

Author: Quoting the JIRA here for posterity:

<details>
<summary>The Logic</summary>

>For ease of comparison, let's call the non-quantized output buffers of Gate and Up OGN and OUN, respectively, and the non-quantized/quantized Down inputs IDN/IDQ. All of these buffers have MB×OC elements, but OGN/OUN/IDN are twice the size of IDQ, since the data type for OGN/OUN/IDN is FP16, whereas the data type of IDQ is INT8.
> OGN is the alias for IDN, since the output of Gate is then fed into Down.
> Let's also forget for a moment about the additional buffers for DQ scales and precomputes, since they do not contribute as much to the overall VRAM footprint.
> 
> Now, the proposed implementation relies upon the fact that it needs neither the OGN/OUN pair nor OGN/IDN pair in memory at the same time, saving MB×OC×sizeof(FP16) bytes of VRAM by aliasing OGN as both OUN and IDN at different moments in time.
> 
> Unfortunately, this changes dramatically when Dynamic Quantization is in play and thus the IDN/IDQ buffers have to exist in VRAM simultaneously, since stream compaction, which DQ is a variation of, on GPU can either run efficiently or run in-place, not both.
> 
> In the existing OV implementation, while the OGN/OUN pair is still required, after IDN has been filled the OUN buffer is no longer needed and can be reused as the buffer to hold the values of IDQ.
> 
> The proposed implementation, if extended to enable dynamic quantization, would need to allocate IDQ as well, which would reduce the footprint compared to OV just by sizeof(OUN)–sizeof(IDQ) ~ MB×OC×sizeof(INT8), instead of ~MB×OC×sizeof(FP16).
> 
> That said, I have 3 potential options of how this should continue.
> 
> Option 1: Public API for in-place binary post-ops.
> 
> * VRAM savings: sizeof(OUN)–sizeof(IDQ), since OUN would become an alias of OGN, but IDQ and IDN would still have to be allocated side-by-side, there's no way around it that doesn't introduce perf regressions
> * Pros: the oneDNN implementation already exists, it just needs the proper public API for OV to use it
> * Cons: OV would need to adjust the graph transformer to use the feature
> 
> Option 2: Dynamic Quantization kernel as part of the oneDNN GMLP primitive.
> 
> * VRAM savings: sizeof(OUN)–sizeof(IDQ), same as Option 1
> * Pros: no additional effort required from OV
> * Cons: the implementation of DQ from OV would have to be duplicated in oneDNN
> 
> Option 3: Microkernels.
> 
> * VRAM savings: sizeof(OUN) + sizeof(IDQ), since DQ could be implemented within the kernel, so OGN and OUN both become redundant
> * Pros: largest VRAM reduction of the 3, by a lot
> * Cons: multiple, see below
> 
> Cons for Option 3.
> 
> Beside the fact that, like in Option 2, DQ from OV would have to be duplicated in oneDNN, I maintain my prior assertion that microkernel mechanism in its current state is not ready for GMLP:
> 
> * Microkernels lack support for precomputed reductions, and even though precomputes are not strictly necessary for GMLP to work, they do speed execution up after all, as E2E experiments show
> * Microkernel-enabled CL code yields enormous kernel binaries; it isn't likely to perform well on GPUs like DG2 or ARL unless the whole binary fits in icache
> * The driver bug that prevents microkernel-based S8/S4 GMLP from running correctly on NVLP hasn't been fixed, and given the nature of the microkernel mechanism this one is not the last, as suggested by e.g. SDPA
> * State-of-the-art GMLP implementation that is compatible with Intel GPUs (my existing one that uses SLM to save and load the Up results looks incompatible) would require Gate/Up weights to be reordered in a piano-like pattern by column to increase locality: N cols of Up then N cols of Gate, etc (1 ≤ N ≤ SIMD); this reordering would need to happen on OV side
> 
> On top of that, as of now I am unable to reliably predict if microkernels would perform on par with the existing 3-GEMM solution, or even how much time it would require to fix the issues from the list above — so keep that in mind if you decide that I should go for Option 3.
</details>

<details>
<summary>The Estimate</summary>

> Based on Andrey’s analysis, neither the GatedMLP primitive path nor the microkernel path appears reasonable from an effort-to-value perspective. I would focus on the in-place binary post-op (short-term, v3.14) and evaluate the token chunking idea on the OV side (discussed with [Kim, Mingyu](https://jira.devtools.intel.com/secure/ViewProfile.jspa?name=mingyuki)):
> 
> 1. Public API for in-place binary post-ops (option 1 from Andrey's comment). This is doable in v3.14 and should provide a limited memory reduction (see the table below)
> 2. Token chunking on the OV side. The idea is to implement a loop around the GatedMLP layers and process one chunk of tokens at a time. This would limit the combined size of the intermediate buffers and allow them to be reused across iterations. The expected memory reduction is substantially greater with growth of the number of tokens - that is, precisely when memory consumption becomes a major concern.
> 
> Estimation for memory savings in GatedMLP (rough estimate for different models)
> 
> * M - tokens (prompt length at prefill)
> * N - MLP intermediate width: W_gate, W_up are [N, K]; W_down is [K, N]
> * U = M x N bytes — one int8 [M,N] intermediate; f16 is 2U
> * 5U pool = OUN (2U) + OGN (2U) + IDQ (1U), all separate allocations. Whole-model, pooled across decoder layers
>     * OUN/OGN/IDQ - introduced in Andrey's comment
>     * O/I - output/input, U/G/D - up/gate/down, N/Q - no-quantized/quantized
> * In-place post-op merges OUN into OGN: 5U -> 3U, saves 2U = 40%, any M
>     * This is under assumption that IDQ and OUN buffers are not reused
>     * If IDQ and OUN are reused then the savings are 4U -> 3U, only 1U = 25%
> * Chunk Mc=2048: MLP pool becomes 5 x Mc x N, saves 5U(1 − Mc/M)
> 
> The table below is assuming 5U baseline overhead on intermediates. The in-place post-op provides some memory savings but token chunking can roughly double them, assuming chunk size of Mc = 2048.
> 
> | Model      |     N |      M | Weights int4 |  KV int8 |   5U pool | Est. total | Saved: in-place post-op | Saved: chunk Mc=2048 |
> |:-----------|------:|-------:|-------------:|---------:|----------:|-----------:|------------------------:|---------------------:|
> | qwen2-0.5B | 4,864 |  8,192 |     0.30 GiB | 0.05 GiB |   190 MiB |   0.53 GiB |          76 MiB (13.9%) |      142 MiB (26.1%) |
> | GLM4-9B    |13,696 |  8,192 |     5.13 GiB | 0.16 GiB |   535 MiB |   5.81 GiB |         214 MiB (3.6%)  |      401 MiB (6.7%)  |
> | llama3-8B  |14,336 |  8,192 |     4.38 GiB | 0.50 GiB |   560 MiB |   5.43 GiB |         224 MiB (4.0%)  |      420 MiB (7.6%)  |
> | qwen2-7B   |18,944 |  8,192 |     4.20 GiB | 0.22 GiB |   740 MiB |   5.14 GiB |         296 MiB (5.6%)  |      555 MiB (10.5%) |
> | qwen2-0.5B | 4,864 | 32,400 |     0.30 GiB | 0.19 GiB |   751 MiB |   1.22 GiB |         301 MiB (24.1%) |      704 MiB (56.3%) |
> | GLM4-9B    |13,696 | 32,400 |     5.13 GiB | 0.62 GiB | 2,116 MiB |   7.82 GiB |         846 MiB (10.6%) |    1,982 MiB (24.8%) |
> | llama3-8B  |14,336 | 32,400 |     4.38 GiB | 1.98 GiB | 2,215 MiB |   8.52 GiB |         886 MiB (10.2%) |    2,075 MiB (23.8%) |
> | qwen2-7B   |18,944 | 32,400 |     4.20 GiB | 0.87 GiB | 2,927 MiB |   7.92 GiB |       1,171 MiB (14.4%) |    2,742 MiB (33.8%) |
> 
</details>

Reviewer 2: I think this could be considered resolved.

inevitably requires an RHS buffer that should exist in VRAM beside DST.

The alternative would be to add a new one-off Sum-like PO, let's call it Prod.
That would essentially duplicate the already very different codepath for Sum
in all of the primitives, whereas the changes to Binary would be benign at
worst, simultaneously bringing a lot more value (in the form of way more ops
than just Sum or Prod) to the table; the actual Binary post-op code isn't going

> to change at all, the most labor-intensive part would be to determine the 0.1%

Reviewer: It seems this RFC assumes that `dst` is almost always read only before the final store. I think that assumption is overly optimistic. For example, on CPU we have to allocate a separate accumulator buffer when sum post ops are used with matmul, convolution and other primitives to preserve `dst`.

This is the contract that every implementation supporting in place binary would have to follow. I think it should be stated explicitly.

I would also either remove the 0.1% number or replace it with a more realistic estimate, since the current value does not seem well supported.

Author: Fair. I haven't got a good enough grasp of the CPU kitchen to estimate the share.
I was mainly talking about the GPU primitives, where writing to the same element of DST more than once is almost always prohibitively expensive.

primitives implementations and configurations that alter DST before the final
write, and exclude them from the support matrix.

## Proposal

The new oneDNN interface for Binary should look like this:

```

> status_t dnnl_post_ops_append_binary_v3(post_ops_t *post_ops,

Reviewer: This is a C API with internal C++ aliases that are not used in public headers. The API description should cover both the C and C++ APIs.

Author: Will do.

Author: Done.

> status_t dnnl_post_ops_append_binary_v2(post_ops_t *post_ops,

Reviewer 3: I think it should be `v3` now.

https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/f7f3089824685009fa32410d8e5c2171242f7a92/include/oneapi/dnnl/dnnl.h#L922-L924

Author: Sorry, mea culpa. Fixed.

        alg_kind_t alg_kind, const memory_desc_t *user_src1_desc,
        const memory_desc_t *user_src2_desc, int inplace);

status_t dnnl_post_ops_get_params_binary_v3(const post_ops_t *post_ops,
        int index, alg_kind_t *alg_kind, const memory_desc_t **user_src1_desc,
        const memory_desc_t **user_src2_desc, int *inplace)

> ```

Reviewer 4: This new operation places has a lot of restrictions on memory descriptors. Rather than increase the complexity of the current interface,  why not just provide a new simpler interface which just omits the invalid configurations:

```
dnnl_post_ops_append_inplace_binary(post_ops_t * post_ops, alg_kind_t alg_kind)
...
```
Also, how would we handle `alg_kind_t` that are non-commutative where there are two potential operations.

Author: I tried to stay in line with the established practices in oneDNN API.
If the separate method to initialize a new kind of binary doesn't break guidelines, I'm all for it.
@dzarukin what is your opinion?

Reviewer 5: With a dedicated C symbol it may happen both versions will need a new extension in the future which would double the effort. Keeping all parameters in one C API eliminates this problem.

C++ API can (and should) be flexible and provide only meaningful set of arguments ensuring not relevant arguments are nullified in C API and C API lets it through as a valid case.

Author: Not relevant anymore.

As can be seen, it only adds a boolean flag that signals that the post-op being
appended should be treated as an in-place Binary.

From a semantical standpoint, this is how the in-place Binaries differ from the
regular ones:

```

> DST = ACC + RHS — binary_add

Reviewer: What about binary select? Is it intentionally excluded from in place support? I'm asking because it seems to have different requirements.

Author: Yes, Select is intentionally excluded, because first and foremost it isn't, in fact, binary, so it wouldn't escape the need to use some other buffer even if RHS gets substituted with DST.

Author: Not relevant anymore.

> DST = ACC × RHS — binary_mul

Reviewer: Right now the post op chain can contain multiple sum post ops. How would that be handled with in place binary?

Author: `DST =` was a mistake on my part. Should have been `ACC = ACC …` everywhere.

Author: Done.

DST = ACC / RHS — binary_div
DST = ACC + DST — Sum
DST = ACC + DST — binary_add & inplace
DST = ACC × DST — binary_mul & inplace

> DST = ACC / DST — binary_div & inplace

Reviewer 4: This explanation doesn't seem precise enough. What are the intended semantics when chaining these in-place post-ops? With the above notation, it looks like an in-place add followed by in-place mul would produce `DST = (ACC+DST_IN)*(ACC+DST_IN)`.

Author: Should have been ACC = ACC + DST. Will correct.

Author: Done.

…
```

— where DST is the destination buffer, ACC is the accumulator register block
within the primitive, and RHS is the separate right-hand-side buffer used in
regular Binary post-ops.

> When `inplace = true`, `user_src1_desc` should equal the memory descriptor of

Reviewer: How do we support cases where `DST` has format kind `any`? Right now the sum post op does not have a memory descriptor so this issue does not exist.

Author: Well, from the POV of semantics there's no necessity for in-place Binary post-ops to even store the RHS MD. All that's needed is a single bit of info to tell the primitive implementation that this particular Binary is in-place.
However, the requirement to provide the DST MD avoids the need to change literally anything in the Binary post-op pipeline for almost all primitives beside the narrow subset that can pick and choose their MDs at init, like Conv and Deconv.

Author: I believe we can allow the in-place Binary MD to have `format_kind = any` for certain primitives where this is a possibility for DST.

Author: Not relevant anymore.

> `DNNL_ARG_DST` both in shape and in type, and `user_src2_desc` should equal

Reviewer 3: Binary post-ops support broadcasting. Does this mean that broadcasting is not allowed with `inplace`?

Author: Yes, this is exactly the case. In-place Binary post-ops do not, by definition, support broadcasting, due to the nature of the input buffer.

Reviewer 2: Could we have this note in the RFC document as well?
I'm asking because there are so many threads right now in this  PR and it is hard to follow all the updates separately..

Author: Added to the RFC.

+
+    // Binary ops with this flag set use DST as RHS which may interfere
+    // with some writes; declare this to let the parent primitive know.
+    bool src1_from_dst;
+
     // This is an unmodifiable user copy of attributes which is used in
     // caching mechanism. Not to be used internally.
     dnnl::impl::memory_desc_t user_src1_desc, user_src2_desc;
 
     // This is a modifiable copy of memory desc. It changes format kind
     // and tag of md in case user passed format_kind::any. To be used
     // everywhere internally.
     dnnl::impl::memory_desc_t src1_desc, src2_desc;
 };
```

The exact name of the flag is up to debate.

With this flag set, on execution the primitive that contains this as `i`-th
post-op should expect a reference to the `DNNL_ARG_DST` buffer passed to it in
`DNNL_ARG_ATTR_MULTIPLE_POST_OP(i) | DNNL_ARG_SRC_1`.

That way, no aspect of the existing Binary post-op pipeline is to be altered
in any way, since DST is, after all, just another regular buffer.

## Caveats

Not all of the oneDNN primitives can support in-place Binary post-ops — namely
those that write intermediate data to DST, e.g. when accumulating with atomics.

> To guard against improper usage, a new `skip_mask_t` flag is to be introduced:

Reviewer: Would it be enough to use a skip mask for this? I think whether this feature is applicable may depend on the blocking, which is determined later during the pd initialization stage, after the attributes are typically checked.

Author: Why would it? Right now it's working fine with Sum, and here it shouldn't, in theory, be any different.

Reviewer: I think I made some assumption here. Let me clarify this first. `sum` does not have a memory descriptor. Do you suggest that we ignore the `src1` memory descriptor when the binary operation is in place?

Author: No, not necessarily, only in cases when the MD is ill-formed.
When it's not we can use the existing Binary post-op implementation with zero edits, and in rare cases (at least in the GPU realm these are rare; AFAIR only Conv-like primitives are allowed to choose their own MD formats) when the MD is ambiguous in any way we can add a patch to take the correct MD from elsewhere.

Reviewer: > No, not necessarily, only in cases when the MD is ill-formed.

What I meant was at the API level. If we can safely ignore it when it's ill-formed, doesn't that imply we can always ignore it? If so, I'm wondering whether it should be part of the API contract in the first place.

Author: We can ignore it if needed, that part is undeniably true. But when the MD is always valid (i.e. known before the post-ops get added, like in GPU Pooling), why should we?

Reviewer: It doesn't quite answer the question, though 🙂. My point is that it seems semantically redundant and the fact that it can be safely ignored feels like a strong indication of that.

Author: Not relevant anymore, since the flag is no more a field of `binary_t`.

     scales_data_type = (unsigned)scales | (1u << 3),
     zero_points = 1u << 4,
     zero_points_groups = (unsigned)zero_points | (1u << 5),
     zero_points_data_type = (unsigned)zero_points | (1u << 6),
     post_ops = 1u << 7,
     sum_dt = 1u << 8,
     rnn_data_qparams = 1u << 9,
     rnn_weights_qparams = 1u << 10,
     rnn_tparams = 1u << 11,
     rnn_weights_projection_qparams = 1u << 12,
     gpu_attr = 1u << 13,
     accumulation_mode = 1u << 14,
     fpmath_mode = 1u << 15,
     dropout = 1u << 16,
     rounding_mode = 1u << 17,
     precomputed_reductions = 1u << 18,
+    inplace_post_ops = (unsigned)post_ops | (1u << 19),
 };
```

That way in-place post-ops become an opt-in feature, so by default no primitive
would accept them unless the implementation allows it explicitly.

## Interface for benchdnn

The benchdnn interface for in-place Binary post-ops is fairly strightforward.
Just adding an `inplace` keyword after the Binary alg name should be enough:

```
… --attr-post-ops=mul:inplace …
```

## Conclusion

In-place Binary post-ops are a powerful tool available at virtually no cost to
the library; they enable significant memory savings and new approaches to DNN

> graph optimization.

Reviewer: What alternatives have you considered? Have you looked into generalizing or extending sum with additional algorithms?

That approach would be much cheaper to implement while staying within the existing semantics.

Author: I did consider extending Sum — and that was, in fact, my first attempt at implementing what this RFC is about.
With the GPU Matmul, which was the intended PoC, it wasn't cheaper than what I propose here by a long shot, as unlike Binary, which is implemented as a proper post-op, Sum in GEMMstone is implemented as an extension of β in the GEMM formula from BLAS: `C = αAB + βC`.

Author: For comparison, enabling in-place Binary post-ops boiled down to prohibiting GEMM configurations that update DST more than once when there's one or more in-place Binary post-ops in attributes.

Reviewer 4: I think it is important to note the distinction between the API interface and the implementation. These do not necessarily need to be 1-1. For an existing example on GPU, prelu is handled as a binary op within the Intel GPU implementation even though it is a separate concept at the API level.

Reviewer: Based on this [comment](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3716413916), where you mentioned that there is no real need for the `src1` memory descriptor, and the overall discussion in this RFC, it seems that the discussion is moving toward stripping the binary post op to fit a particular semantic. If we also strip everything else that is not needed, as @rjoursler suggested in the [other comment](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3714265467), we end up with something that is very close to what I described here about generalizing or extending `sum` with additional algorithms.

I understand that implementing this feature through the binary injector is more convenient for GPU, especially Intel GPUs. However, since the API will affect all devices and vendors, I'm not sure that implementation convenience should drive the API design. From a technical perspective, could you still use the binary injector even if `sum` were extended?

Author: Judging by the things being done to the Binary post-op, like adding a second MD that essentially made Binary a Ternary, I'm not convinced that what's being proposed is too egregious.

Author: BTW, in the JIT IR generator for GPU Conv/Deconv we've had support for ternary post-ops for a while now, but that's beside the point.

Reviewer: > Judging by the things being done to the Binary post-op, like adding a second MD that essentially made Binary a Ternary, I'm not convinced that what's being proposed is too egregious.

I agree that having the `select` operation under `binary` may look a bit unusual. However, since this was introduced as an extension, we essentially had two options:

1. Introduce a new ternary primitive for this specific case.
2. Extend `binary` to support a ternary operation.

When we talk about making `binary` in-place, we're actually narrowing its scope. In that form, it becomes something that sits somewhere between `sum` and `binary`, arguably closer to `sum`. That raises the question of what the right abstraction for the target operation should be.

Before committing to an in-place `binary` design, I think it would be valuable to compare both approaches side by side. That would make the design trade-offs explicit and help ensure we're making the right long-term choice, rather than optimizing for a single use case.

For additional context, if we decide to proceed with an in-place `binary`, the CPU implementation would effectively use a `sum` injector under the hood.

Author: IMO, the killer feature of the approach proposed here, compared to extending Sum, is 1 line of new code (appending the skip mask) for the majority of GPU primitives — except Deconv, which is implemented via Conv for the most part, and Conv itself.

Author: @densamoilov Side-by-side comparison now in Options, with @mzhukova's proposal added as option 5.

On extending Sum specifically — that's option 2, and its cons now record that this was prototyped rather than merely considered: in GEMMstone, where Sum is an extension of `β` in `C = αAB + βC` rather than a post-op proper, `β` was extended to also carry an algorithm kind.
It worked, but it left `β` meaning something unrelated to BLAS for every algorithm other than `binary_add`, while reimplementing what the Binary post-op pipeline already does — so it was scrapped in favor of extending Binary.

> From a technical perspective, could you still use the binary injector even if `sum` were extended?

In Conv/Deconv/Pooling/Reorder, yes. This is exactly how it's done right now with the regular Sum; [JIT v1](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/bfc2ad13a1227a9160a787d4a4882154f30a99a2/src/gpu/intel/jit/ir/post_ops.cpp#L176), [JIT v2](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/bfc2ad13a1227a9160a787d4a4882154f30a99a2/src/gpu/intel/conv/jit/v2/builder.cpp#L682).
In JIT GEMM not so much, since it wasn't a regular injector but its own codepath entirely. Now documented in the RFC.

the buffer semantics of Sum to all other Binaries and eventually deprecating
Sum.

The need for this, beside purely architectural, is also practical: many modern
LLMs like LLaMa, especially in OpenVINO, contain 3-GEMM subgraphs that can
benefit from a variant of Sum that performs multiplication instead of addition,
potentially saving dozens of % of E2E VRAM compared to regular binary_mul which
inevitably requires an RHS buffer that should exist in VRAM beside DST.

The alternative would be to add a new one-off Sum-like PO, let's call it Prod.
That would essentially duplicate the already very different codepath for Sum
in all of the primitives, whereas the changes to Binary would be benign at
worst, simultaneously bringing a lot more value (in the form of way more ops
than just Sum or Prod) to the table; the actual Binary post-op code isn't going
to change at all, the most labor-intensive part would be to determine the
primitives implementations and configurations that alter DST before the final
write, and exclude them from the support matrix.

## Proposal

The new oneDNN interface for in-place Binary post-ops should look like this:

```

> dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_post_ops_set_allow_inplace_bin(

Reviewer 6: Several naming suggestions:

1. Use `dnnl_primitive_attr` prefix since this is now a standalone attribute.
2. Drop `allow` (see boolean-based `dnnl_primitive_attr_set_deterministic` for comparison).
3. Replace `bin` with `post_ops`. This flag can also be applied to PReLU and potentially to a future ternary post-op. Keeping `bin` in the name would specialize it unnecessarily.
4. `inplace` -> `alias`. To me "in-place post-op" sounds more like post-op takes its input and writes its own output (though this one is not a strong preference).

Based on the above. the final suggestion is `dnnl_primitive_attr_set_post_ops_dst_alias()`.

@rjoursler @densamoilov Please share your thoughts.

Author: I'm strongly against moving this to attr, as it separates an important aspect of the post ops from the post_ops structure — e.g. when copying post_ops to the new attr the flag would be lost unless the user remembers to copy it.

Author: …Wait. Is it just about the naming?
In any case, `dnnl_primitive_attr` in the name is going to be confusing IMO.

Reviewer 6: Let's continue [here](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3753965989).

Reviewer 6: > I'm strongly against moving this to attr, as it separates an important aspect of the post ops from the post_ops structure — e.g. when copying post_ops to the new attr the flag would be lost unless the user remembers to copy it.

Yep, this is a good argument. I was thinking about the things that add resistance:

- To some extent, this sets a precedent: currently `dnnl_post_ops_t` can be appended to and queried, but post-ops don't carry other sub-attributes.
- The attribute machinery is well established: we have `attr-xxx` conventions in verbose and benchdnn, familiar conventions for where attributes live, how they map to `skip_mask_t`, etc.
    - `dnnl_post_ops_xxx` API would go against these conventions: we need to come up with benchdnn syntax for it, verbose parser adjustments, etc.

All in all, I still prefer a separate global attribute - for the sake of feature simplicity. If others prefer `dnnl_post_ops_xxx`, I am fine with that too.

Reviewer 4: For what it is worth, my preference is for a global attribute as well. I think we should only bother with the more fine-grained approach if we have a motivating use case.

Author: @rjoursler How global are we talking? I mean, in `post_ops` or in `attr`?
`attr` has potential to become a nightmare to implement if the target primitive conststs of nested primitives.

Author: …In fact, `post_ops` does as well, unless the flag gets manually copied everywhere.
From this standpoint, a flag in `binary_t` would be the ideal solution.

Reviewer 4: > @rjoursler How global are we talking? I mean, in post_ops or in attr?

I mean the attribute applies to the entire post-ops object, rather than per post-ops entry. By doing this, we don't need to worry about tracking which particular post-op aliases the destination buffer, as we are unlikely to use the extra information for optimization purposes.

Reviewer: I'm okay with the aliasing property being its own attribute. Attributes can contain multiple entries that could be lost if you simply copy the post-ops so if someone decides to do that it's their responsibility to make sure they perform the correct copy.

Without the flag, the burden of ensuring that the inputs/outputs do not alias is on the user, as it currently is for primitives unless the primitive explicitly states that aliasing is allowed.

I like `dnnl_primitive_attr_set_post_ops_dst_alias` or `dnnl_primitive_attr_set_post_ops_may_alias_dst` to emphasize that this is a permission.

Leveraging the existing infrastructure for attributes is also helpful.

Author: @echeresh @rjoursler @densamoilov Adopted — the API is now `dnnl_primitive_attr_set`/`get_post_ops_may_alias_dst` with the C++ counterpart, and the RFC notes `..._post_ops_dst_alias` as an equally acceptable spelling. The permission semantics @densamoilov wanted the name to convey is now stated explicitly.

One thing worth noting from the new Implementation section: handling the flag in `copy_from()` does not address the nested-primitive concern. Implementations that need multiple nested primitives that differ substantially do not, in general, clone the parent attrs. The flag therefore defaults to `false`, and the nested primitive is then free to use DST as intermediate storage, which is exactly what it's meant to forbid. Every site that constructs attributes for a nested primitive sharing the parent's DST has to propagate it explicitly, and missing one is a silent correctness bug.

Now documented under Options>4 and in Implementation.

Author: Correction to my comment above: the nested-primitive hazard is not present in the library as it stands. I went looking for an implementation that would demonstrate it and could not find one — every implementation that nests several different primitives needing different attributes either rejects post-ops outright or is on its way out, and every implementation that does accept post-ops either nests nothing or nests a single primitive that can take the parent's attributes unchanged (e.g. jit:ir Deconv on GPU).

What survives is the structural asymmetry rather than the bug. At the API boundary the attribute is fail-closed: an implementation that does not list the skip mask bit rejects it outright, so the user cannot enable aliasing where it would break. At an internal boundary it is fail-open: a sub-primitive handed a fresh `attr_t` is never told DST may be aliased, so it has nothing to reject, and the mistake surfaces as wrong results rather than a failed PD. So this is a prospective cost, not a present defect — and an awkward one, in that the first implementation to hit it will have no existing site to copy the correct handling from.

RFC corrected.

Reviewer: To me, the concern about attributes for nested primitives doesn’t seem significant. When we create nested primitives, we’re responsible for passing the right attributes. Each implementation defines which attributes are appropriate for its nested primitives. So, it’s not supposed to be perfect forwarding, even if it happens to be in some cases.

Author: With Option 5 now being the main focus of the RFC, there are no more forwarding issues.

        dnnl_post_ops_t post_ops, int value);

dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_post_ops_get_allow_inplace_bin(
        const_dnnl_post_ops_t post_ops, int *value);
```

Here, `int value` is a boolean flag (for lack of `bool` in ANSI C) that signals
that the user wants to add 1 or more Binary post-ops that read `DNNL_ARG_DST`.

In general, no primitive should care which of the Binary post-ops reference
DST; all that matters is the presence or absence of such Binaries, since the
whole post-op block gets executed after the main primitive body had already
finished execution but before DST is written to.

From a semantical standpoint, this is how the in-place Binaries differ from the
regular ones:

```
ACC = ACC + RHS — binary_add
ACC = ACC × RHS — binary_mul
ACC = ACC / RHS — binary_div
ACC = ACC + DST — Sum
ACC = ACC + DST — binary_add & inplace
ACC = ACC × DST — binary_mul & inplace
ACC = ACC / DST — binary_div & inplace
…
```

— where DST is the destination buffer, ACC is the accumulator register block
within the primitive, and RHS is the separate right-hand-side buffer used in
regular Binary post-ops.

When adding an in-place Binary, `user_src1_desc` should equal the memory

> descriptor of `DNNL_ARG_DST` both in shape and in type, and `user_src2_desc`

Reviewer 6: Nit: type can be different, it's enough to require the same type size (e.g. a binary can read `s32` but `dst` can be `f32`).

Author: True. Will correct.

should equal `nullptr`, otherwise the post-op is to be considered malformed.

## Implementation

Internally, a boolean flag within `dnnl_post_ops` is proposed; its name is up
for debate, but here it is proposed to be `allow_inplace_bin_`. Its helper
method, `bool allow_inplace_bin()`, would tell the caller whether to expect
in-place Binaries:

```
 struct dnnl_post_ops {
 
 …
 
     std::vector<entry_t> entry_;
+    bool allow_inplace_bin_ = false;
 
 …
 
+    bool allow_inplace_bin() const {
+        if (!allow_inplace_bin_) return false;
+        for (auto &e : entry_)
+            if (e.is_like_binary()) return true;
+        return false;
+    }
 
 …
 
 }
```

> With this flag set, on execution the primitive that contains this as `i`-th

Reviewer 6: -> "the primitive should expect a reference to the `DNNL_ARG_DST` in an arbitrary post-op"

Author: Done.

post-op should expect a reference to the `DNNL_ARG_DST` buffer passed to it in
`DNNL_ARG_ATTR_MULTIPLE_POST_OP(i) | DNNL_ARG_SRC_1`.

That way, no aspect of the existing Binary post-op pipeline is to be altered
in any way, since DST is, after all, just another regular buffer.

## Caveats

> Not all of the oneDNN primitives can support in-place Binary post-ops — namely

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Not all of the oneDNN primitive implementations can support in-place Binary post-ops — namely
```
A slight adjustment: In theory, all oneDNN primitives can support such post-ops, however, whether a given implementation can handle them depends on its specific properties.

Author: Will do.

```
 enum class skip_mask_t : unsigned {
     none = 0,
     scales = 1u << 1,
     scales_groups = (unsigned)scales | (1u << 2),
     scales_data_type = (unsigned)scales | (1u << 3),
     zero_points = 1u << 4,
     zero_points_groups = (unsigned)zero_points | (1u << 5),
     zero_points_data_type = (unsigned)zero_points | (1u << 6),
     post_ops = 1u << 7,
     sum_dt = 1u << 8,
     rnn_data_qparams = 1u << 9,
     rnn_weights_qparams = 1u << 10,
     rnn_tparams = 1u << 11,
     rnn_weights_projection_qparams = 1u << 12,
     gpu_attr = 1u << 13,
     accumulation_mode = 1u << 14,
     fpmath_mode = 1u << 15,
     dropout = 1u << 16,
     rounding_mode = 1u << 17,
     precomputed_reductions = 1u << 18,
+    inplace_binary_post_ops = (unsigned)post_ops | (1u << 19),
 };
```

That way in-place post-ops become an opt-in feature, so by default no primitive
would accept them unless the implementation allows it explicitly.

## Interface for benchdnn

The benchdnn interface for in-place Binary post-ops is fairly strightforward.
Just adding an `inplace` keyword after the Binary alg name should be enough:

```

> … --attr-post-ops=mul:inplace …

Reviewer 6: I suggest handling this via a new benchdnn knob to not overload the post-op parsing logic. Additionally, it's more preferrable to have 1-to-1 mapping between API attributes and benchdnn knobs.

Author: Won't be possible, I'm afraid. With a separate PO-agnostic knob how would we know which exact PO needs to be the target?

Reviewer 6: @hidefromkgb Let's make sure we are on the same page. Please check out my comment: https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#issuecomment-5196191074

Let me know if this approach is clear to you, and if you think the approach will work. Note that this approach doesn't require extra information about the exact post-op. It's a blanket, primitive-level attribute.

Author: I do understand how this works.
Let's imagine the situation:
```
--conv --engine=gpu --dir=FWD_I --dt=u8:s8:f32 --attr-post-ops=mul:f32+add:f32 --attr-post-ops-enable-inplace=true mb89ic80ih3oc131oh2kh1sh2ph0
```
Which of the post-ops would become in-place here — the first, the second, both, or none?

Author: With the approach I propose these are 4 distinct benchdnn run lines:
```
# first:
--conv --engine=gpu --dir=FWD_I --dt=u8:s8:f32 --attr-post-ops=mul:f32:inplace+add:f32 mb89ic80ih3oc131oh2kh1sh2ph0
# second:
--conv --engine=gpu --dir=FWD_I --dt=u8:s8:f32 --attr-post-ops=mul:f32+add:f32:inplace mb89ic80ih3oc131oh2kh1sh2ph0
# both:
--conv --engine=gpu --dir=FWD_I --dt=u8:s8:f32 --attr-post-ops=mul:f32:inplace+add:f32:inplace mb89ic80ih3oc131oh2kh1sh2ph0
# none:
--conv --engine=gpu --dir=FWD_I --dt=u8:s8:f32 --attr-post-ops=mul:f32+add:f32 mb89ic80ih3oc131oh2kh1sh2ph0
```

Reviewer 6: > Which of the post-ops would become in-place here — the first, the second, both, or none?

Discussed offline. This decision is mainly relevant for testing - we need to decide whose post-op `src1` buffers should alias with `dst`. My suggestion is to do this opportunistically: whenever the alias flag is set, benchdnn automatically detects all `dst`-compatible binary `src1` buffers and uses `dst` for all of them:

- This approach looks robust enough to catch potential issues.
- Per-post-op logic is neither introduced at the benchdnn CLI level (parsing, verbose converter, docs) nor at the test generation level (when is aliasing valid?).
- This approach is extensible. This is not related to the public API, so future extensions can be done on demand.

Author: OK.
@densamoilov @dzarukin @rjoursler what is your opinion on this?

Reviewer 4: > My suggestion is to do this opportunistically: whenever the alias flag is set, benchdnn automatically detects all dst-compatible binary src1 buffers and uses dst for all of them

This sounds ill-defined to me, especially if we allow the post-ops to use different data-types than the destination type.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what `dst-compatible binary src1 buffers` are here. Can you please elaborate on this?

Reviewer 6: > This sounds ill-defined to me, especially if we allow the post-ops to use different data-types than the destination type.

Can you please clarify? Different data-types are negotiable, if no requests to support, let's take them off the table.

> I'm not sure I understand what dst-compatible binary src1 buffers are here. Can you please elaborate on this?

When considering alias between `dst` and binary `src1`, not all aliasing is valid. There is a set of necessary conditions to meet:

1. Same data type size (or even same data types, if going this route)
2. Same memory descriptor layout

For example, consider:

```
--matmul --attr-post-ops=add:f32:3:ab+mul:f32:2 --dtag=ab 128x128:128x128
```

We have two post-ops here, the first has `src1` compatible with `dst` (same type + same layout) while the second `src1` is not (layout mismatch).

Author: > Can you please clarify?

@echeresh Consider this:
```
--conv --engine=gpu --dir=FWD_I --dt=u8:s8:f16 --attr-post-ops=mul:f16+add:bf16 mb89ic80ih3oc131oh2kh1sh2ph0
```
F16 and BF16 are mutually incompatible, so despite the matching shape and the same dt size one of these would inevitably need a separate RHS buffer.

Reviewer 4: > Can you please clarify? Different data-types are negotiable, if no requests to support, let's take them off the table.

The above example is effectively what I was thinking about. We need to specify which type takes precedence for the dst buffer.

Reviewer 6: @hidefromkgb @rjoursler Thanks, I agree, with the same-size requirement we have this kind of ambiguity. As I mentioned - same type vs same type size is negotiable.

Let's check if this case is even theoretically relevant for OpenVINO. If not, starting with the same-type requirement, as was originally in Andrey's RFC, looks like the right trade-off to me. I don't like the idea of paying an extra cost for something that doesn't have practical use. Just my two cents.

Author: Now listed explicitly under "Interface for benchdnn": @echeresh your global knob is option 2, the original `:inplace` is option 1, and option 3 is a hybrid — the global knob from [2] plus an optional list of post-op indices.

The section also spells out why the selection question can't be answered by inspecting the MDs: target buffers need not have DST's type, only one of the same size, while a buffer whose MD matches DST exactly, type and all, might not be intended for aliasing. "Alias everything compatible" is therefore a policy, and a yes/no global knob can express nothing else.

As this is validation-only with no API implications, the RFC now leaves the choice open.

Author: @echeresh On the same-size vs same-type question: let's continue [here](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3848088773).

Worth noting either way: tightening this does not resolve the benchdnn implementation issue. Even under exact type equality, a post-op buffer whose MD matches that of DST should have an option, for validation purposes, to be excluded from aliasing DST, so the harness still has to be told rather than infer it — which is why the options under "Interface for benchdnn" are now the way they are.

Reviewer 2: I believe safe to resolve, since it references other thread at the end.

write, and exclude them from the support matrix.

## Proposal

The new oneDNN interface for in-place Binary post-ops should look like this:

```
dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_post_ops_set_allow_inplace_bin(
        dnnl_post_ops_t post_ops, int value);

dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_post_ops_get_allow_inplace_bin(
        const_dnnl_post_ops_t post_ops, int *value);
```

Here, `int value` is a boolean flag (for lack of `bool` in ANSI C) that signals
that the user wants to add 1 or more Binary post-ops that read `DNNL_ARG_DST`.

In general, no primitive should care which of the Binary post-ops reference
DST; all that matters is the presence or absence of such Binaries, since the
whole post-op block gets executed after the main primitive body had already
finished execution but before DST is written to.

From a semantical standpoint, this is how the in-place Binaries differ from the
regular ones:

```
ACC = ACC + RHS — binary_add
ACC = ACC × RHS — binary_mul
ACC = ACC / RHS — binary_div
ACC = ACC + DST — Sum
ACC = ACC + DST — binary_add & inplace
ACC = ACC × DST — binary_mul & inplace
ACC = ACC / DST — binary_div & inplace
…

> ```

Reviewer 2: (semi-random spot) So if we have several post-ops chained (say binary_mul inplace + binary_add inplace or binary_mul inplace + sum), do they all just read original DST value?

Author: Yes, just like with the original post-ops which read their RHS buffers.

Reviewer 2: I think this is worth specifying in the RFC, since that's not an obvious point

Author: Done.

— where DST is the destination buffer, ACC is the accumulator register block
within the primitive, and RHS is the separate right-hand-side buffer used in
regular Binary post-ops.

When adding an in-place Binary, any of its memory descriptors, most commonly
`user_src1_desc`, should equal the descriptor of `DNNL_ARG_DST` in shape and
have a type that is the same bit size as that of DST but not necessarily the

> same type (e.g. `u8` vs. `f8_e5m2`).

Reviewer 2: Could you clarify what is the reasoning to allow different (but same size) data types?

Author: Simple. This copies the Sum logic and broadens the coverage.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that copying old behavior is necessarily a good reason, do you have a good use case in mind that could justify this need?

Author: I believe an example of how this could be put to good use is U8 output with an S8 multiplicand stored in its U8 buffer.

Author: Clarification: the cases actually motivating this RFC are either `f16` or `f32` throughout, and my `s8`/`u8` example is hypothetical.
The RFC now says so explicitly.

The reasoning for same-bit-size rather than same-type is structural rather than usecase-driven: the aliased buffer is DST's own storage read back under a different interpretation, so the operand occupies exactly the bytes DST occupies and only the type used to decode them differs. Shape and layout have to match regardless, and that is everything that governs addressing, so nothing downstream of the descriptor cares which of the two rules applies.

Exact type equality is therefore a defensible alternative and a cheaper one to validate. The only argument against it is that it's a narrowing, and would have to be revisited the first time a case of Sum-like types — size-compatible but different — does turn up. Nothing else in the proposal depends on the choice, so I won't object if it's decided that strictly matching types are the way to go.

Reviewer 2: I see, thanks for clarifying on that. Since there is no real use case for the relaxed check yet, can the RFC just default to requiring exact type? Feel free to resolve this thread once the update is posted.

Author: Done.

## Implementation

Internally, a boolean flag within `dnnl_post_ops` is proposed; its name is up
for debate, but here it is proposed to be `allow_inplace_bin_`. Its helper
method, `bool allow_inplace_bin()`, would tell the caller whether to expect
in-place Binaries:

```
 struct dnnl_post_ops {
 
 …
 
     std::vector<entry_t> entry_;
+    bool allow_inplace_bin_ = false;
 
 …
 
+    bool allow_inplace_bin() const {
+        if (!allow_inplace_bin_) return false;
+        for (auto &e : entry_)

> +            if (e.is_like_binary()) return true;

Reviewer 2: I believe this would include prelu and something like binary select, is this the intent?

Author: Yes, this was the intent. Any PO with a buffer can have this buffer aliased.

Not all of the oneDNN primitive implementations can support in-place Binary
post-ops — namely those that write intermediate data to DST, e.g. when
accumulating with atomics. To guard against improper usage, a new `skip_mask_t`
flag is to be introduced:

```
 enum class skip_mask_t : unsigned {
     none = 0,
     scales = 1u << 1,
     scales_groups = (unsigned)scales | (1u << 2),
     scales_data_type = (unsigned)scales | (1u << 3),
     zero_points = 1u << 4,
     zero_points_groups = (unsigned)zero_points | (1u << 5),
     zero_points_data_type = (unsigned)zero_points | (1u << 6),
     post_ops = 1u << 7,
     sum_dt = 1u << 8,
     rnn_data_qparams = 1u << 9,
     rnn_weights_qparams = 1u << 10,
     rnn_tparams = 1u << 11,
     rnn_weights_projection_qparams = 1u << 12,
     gpu_attr = 1u << 13,
     accumulation_mode = 1u << 14,
     fpmath_mode = 1u << 15,
     dropout = 1u << 16,
     rounding_mode = 1u << 17,
     precomputed_reductions = 1u << 18,
+    inplace_binary_post_ops = (unsigned)post_ops | (1u << 19),
 };
```

That way in-place post-ops become an opt-in feature, so by default no primitive
would accept them unless the implementation allows it explicitly.

> 

Reviewer 2: Just to clarify (and probably this note might need to be in RFC), should DST with dynamic scales be excluded from support fully?

Reviewer 2: And to clarify further, do we at all care about DST with any scales (even static) and zps? Or this is also not an intent and would be simply unsupported with in-place post-ops?
For instance I'm not quite sure how it would look like with binary_mul. Could you please expand on this and add this to the RFC too, since I think [this trick](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3717336644) won't work for multiplication type of post-op.

Author: No, DST with dynamic scales shouldn't be excluded, at least on GPU, as on GPU the scales are applied in GRF and only then get written back.
The `eltwise_linear` hack doesn't apply to anything beyond `binary_add`, true, but then again, Sum has immediate scales and ZPs but other buffer-equipped post-ops do not.

Reviewer 2: So how would DST with static/dynamic scales and zps + in-place binary_mul post op work together?

Author: DST would be read as usual, with no alterations to it since kernel scheduling, and then it's going to get overwritten with the kernel output, scales and ZPs applied.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I wasn't clear, what I'm trying to understand is specifically the meaning of in-place binary_mul (which is the main driving operation of this RFC, correct?) when DST is quantized (static or dynamic scales).

What does `acc = acc * dst` mean when DST has scales and zero-points?

Typically the flow is `acc = A * B` -> apply post-ops -> apply DST scale (as in `acc = acc / scale`). If the "apply post-ops" step have in-place flag and reads DST, it uses the quantized DST, not the real DST that we obtain after scales and zero-points are applied, right?

This is where the sum post-op works, because it can dequantize when reading DST, that's also why I referred to the binary_add + eltwise_linear trick, since that can get us a dequantized DST as well. But there's no equivalent trick for binary_mul per my understanding (maybe we could do something about scales, but not zero-points I believe).

Based on the motivation (memory savings), I assume we care about low-precision, so quantized DST (with scales and zps) should be in scope, but I'm just not following how it's meant to work in that case.

Author: > If the "apply post-ops" step have in-place flag and reads DST, it uses the quantized DST, not the real DST that we obtain after scales and zero-points are applied, right?

Precisely. The post-op just reads the raw DST, without applying any ZPs/scales, as they are intended for the result to be written to DST, not the data read from it.

For `binary_mul` (and other less usual Binary types like `binary_max` for example), there is no need for ZPs and scales, especially when they are immediate and scalar.

Reviewer: > Precisely. The post-op just reads the raw DST, without applying any ZPs/scales, as they are intended for the result to be written to DST, not the data read from it.

I think what @mzhukova is trying to say is that it doesn't seem to work in the general case where you want to apply scale/zp to dst before reading it. This is why the sum post-op has scale and zp parameters.

Reviewer 2: Yes, exactly that. For this whole thing to work we need extra dequantization step seems like.
So we either need to disallow in-place binary with DST when scales/zps are present or we need to have a new binary_mul in-place post-op that is able to carry scales and zero-points like sum does.

Reviewer 6: > Based on the motivation (memory savings), I assume we care about low-precision, so quantized DST (with scales and zps) should be in scope, but I'm just not following how it's meant to work in that case.

@hidefromkgb Do the OpenVINO cases use `f16` destination with no scales and no zero-points?

If yes, then the dequantization step is not relevant for them.

Reviewer 2: Well I think this reframes RFC scope quite a bit. If the OV cases are only f16 with no scales/zps, then we are really just solving a single small problem and not the general "all binary post-ops should work in-place", but RFC seems to be focused on the 2nd one.

So I think there are two routes:
- Scope explicitly what is required (e.g. unquantized DST) and then keep the API minimal like new in-place binary_mul post-op (or follow sum API if quantization is expected).
- If we want to pursue more generalized case (i.e. all binary post-ops should support in-place), then we need more evidence that it is actually needed beyond this one workload, and probably some more time to work through how all the concepts and supported configurations fit together, because we already hit one issue that wasn't considered and that the current design doesn't support.

So @hidefromkgb and @echeresh could you please clarify on request and motivation?

Reviewer 6: @mzhukova I agree, adding the exact use cases from OpenVINO could be useful.

> Scope explicitly what is required (e.g. unquantized DST) and then keep the API minimal like new in-place binary_mul post-op (or follow sum API if quantization is expected).

Also an option though it's harder to extend in the future. API-wise, a generic version + documented restrictions may still be the right choice.

Author: @mzhukova @densamoilov @echeresh I believe there's at least some confusion going on here.
DST scales and ZPs are *not*, in fact, applied to DST — but rather to ACC which is only then written to DST.
Which is why DST scales and DST ZPs have no bearing (as it should be) on what data the in-place post-ops would pull from DST.

Author: > where you want to apply scale/zp to dst before reading it.

Wait, but I don't. There was no such claim in the RFC, of that I'm absolutely certain.

Reviewer 6: > DST scales and ZPs are not, in fact, applied to DST — but rather to ACC which is only then written to DST.
Which is why DST scales and DST ZPs have no bearing (as it should be) on what data the in-place post-ops would pull from DST.

Yes, but this discussion is about scale/zero-point like in the sum post-op. Sum can support auto-dequantization while the binary post-op can't. @mzhukova is asking - "Should the new operation support scale/zero-point as well? Is this something that could be required in practice?"

Reviewer 2: @hidefromkgb You're right about the mechanics of how things work now, and I'm not arguing with that part - DST scale/zp are applied to acc, and then acc is written to DST. So they indeed don't change what in-place binary reads from DST, yes.

But that is not what I was asking about. DST is the matmul output, so its scale and zps describe how the result gets written. In-place binary reads the data that was already in DST before this op ran, i.e. the data this matmul didn't compute. The output scale and zps (provided to matmul via set_scales/zps) can't describe that data, and no other binary can either (only the sum post-op can, since it brings its own scales and zps).

So my point was that if the data in DST is quantized (e.g. int8/fp8), then in-place binary_mul multiplies acc by some raw quantized values and there is no step that turns this data back into real values upon reading.

So the question is should we expect / support DST that holds quantized data as an input to in-place binary?
If it's always f16 values (like mentioned above), then we should reflect this in the RFC motivation explicitly, and this would be a different problem to solve vs generic support of everything that the library offers now.
If it can be int8 quantized data, then we are basically using the wrong values for the matmul + in-place binary_mul sequence, and to fix that the binary would need to have its own read-side scale/zp, like sum.

I hope this clarifies the confusion, please ensure the motivation and use cases are updated, so that the scope of the feature would be clearer.

Author: > So the question is should we expect / support DST that holds quantized data as an input to in-place binary?

But of course. Buffers of any data type, passed to a binary post-op, should be properly read and applied, like it's already being done now.
I believe there's too much parasitic context riding on the fact that the buffer is DST. If the data type is INT8 then so be it.
If the user wants a dequantized Sum without using Sum, then `linear(add(linear(acc)))` would be the proper choice.
If the user wanted any other dequantized post-op then they would've chosen the other data type for the post-op instead of INT8, which would bar them from using in-place post-ops in some circumatances, but oh well alas.
This is, after all, a pretty regular Binary post-op, just with its RHS data taken from DST.

Author: > "Should the new operation support scale/zero-point as well? Is this something that could be required in practice?"

No, it definitely should not.

* For non-multiplicative ops (`binary_add`, `binary_sub`, `binary_min`, `binary_max`, `binary_ge`, `binary_gt`, `binary_le`, `binary_lt`, `binary_eq`, `binary_ne`) there is a workaround.
* For everything else (`binary_mul`, `binary_div`) there's a workaround if no ZPs are involved, but no effort is going to be made, at least right now, to add ZP support to quantized multiplicative Binaries. Life's not fair, wear a hard hat.

Reviewer 2: I think considering all discussions together, I believe we should probably limit this feature rather than make it a generic one. We're already seeing a list of unsupported cases that need to be excluded, so covering all binary operations (and making them work with the rest of the features that the library supports) doesn't seem reasonable considering only a narrow case is valid / evidence provided.

On scale/zp specifically, the question asked was whether it might be required in a real world. "_It definitely should not be supported_" sounds like a preference, not evidence that practice never needs it. So the question of need is still open I believe.

Overall the analysis that has already happened across a few threads is something that should have happened before RFC is published, and it should go into the RFC document now. So please update it, the doc should carry the updated scope, support matrix, limitations, etc., since these documents are referred later by other developers.

Separately, I'll be honest and share that I'm not comfortable with the tone here, since comments like "_life's not fair, wear a hard hat_" aren't really constructive for RFC discussion where we are all trying to help and come up with the best design.

Author: > "It definitely should not be supported" sounds like a preference, not evidence that practice never needs it.

In practice, not once has anyone asked us about scales and zero points for binary post-ops, which to my mind is evidence enough.
Ergo, I really don't see why this is an issue here.

> Separately, I'll be honest and share that I'm not comfortable with the tone here, since comments like "life's not fair, wear a hard hat" aren't really constructive for RFC discussion where we are all trying to help and come up with the best design.

Sorry. I made an attempt to lighten the mood, as I felt that the tone of the discussion was too harsh.
Apparently I failed, and the tone is now even more harsh.

Reviewer 7: > In practice, not once has anyone asked us about scales and zero points for binary post-ops, which to my mind is evidence enough.

We are not discussing binary post-ops in this RFC though. We are discussing a mechanism to provide an in-place multiplication for matmul `dst` tensor specifically for Gated MLP use case. So the question here is whether `f16` case is sufficient or we will encounter cases where non-trivial quantization/dequantization is actually required. It would be very helpful to at least get hard data on that from OpenVINO models.

Author: @mzhukova The RFC now carries the full analysis in Caveats>Quantization:

* A Sum-like quant support matrix for every single-RHS Binary algorithm; `binary_mul`/`binary_div` with `ZP ≠ 0` are the only cases that cannot be represented.
* An explicit statement that an in-place Binary reads DST as an ordinary RHS buffer, so any dt valid for a regular Binary RHS is valid — quantized types included — and that DST scales/ZPs apply to ACC, not to DST. I suspect this is where much of the confusion in this thread originated.
* The reasoning for not giving Binary its own scale/ZP — scoped out of the RFC rather than ruled out in general.

@vpirogov the model data you asked for is a separate item, still pending; will follow up in the Overview thread.

Author: @vpirogov On second thought, I believe it'd be more appropriate to answer right here.
I finally have data on how OV utilize the relevant post-ops. Collected from multiple E2E results over a pool of ~75 GBs worth of GMLP-enabled networks run on BMG.
```bash
$ grep -IRno 'binary_\(add\|mul\):[a-z0-9]*' | cut -d: -f3- | sort | uniq -c
   3744 binary_add:f16
   1248 binary_mul:f16
    672 binary_mul:f32
```

Reviewer 2: @hidefromkgb Let's add OV usage data to the motivation, incl. the data types and resolve this thread afterwards.

Author: Done.

Sum eventually.

The need for this, beside purely architectural, is also practical: many modern
LLMs like LLaMa, especially in OpenVINO, contain 3-GEMM subgraphs that can
benefit from a variant of Sum that performs multiplication instead of addition,
potentially saving dozens of % of E2E VRAM compared to regular binary_mul which
inevitably requires an RHS buffer that should exist in VRAM beside DST.

## Options

There are several approaches to adding an implicit multiplication post-op:

* Add a new one-off Sum-like post-op.
    * Pros: The most conceptually straightforward option.
    * Cons: Will essentially duplicate (and then triplicate, for potential
    other binary operations) the already very different codepath for Sum in
    most of the primitives' implementations.
* Extend Sum to support other algorithms.
    * Pros: Existing codepath for Sum in most of the primitives.
    * Cons: Will still duplicate at least some Binary post-op code, furthermore
    Sum was never even intended to support other algorithms beside addition, so
    extending the Sum PO will require a significant amount of unnecessary work.

> * Add a flag to `post_ops_t::binary_t` that would signal that the `src1` buffer

Reviewer 2: For the "only a new flag" options, please ensure to document the analysis from the DST with scales/zps thread (i.e. that we will not be able to support quantized DST data).

Author: Will do.

Author: Done.

Author: Documented in Caveats>Quantization, details in the [other thread](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3817799766).

# In-place binary post-ops: sum -> binary_add(dst), and more

## Overview

The Sum post-op in oneDNN is not like the other post-ops: it performs a binary
operation but requires no right-hand-side buffer, instead taking its input from
DST. This behavior can be replicated in all of the Binary post-ops, extending
the buffer semantics of Sum to all other Binaries.

The need for this, beside purely architectural, is also practical: many modern
LLMs like LLaMa, especially in OpenVINO, contain 3-GEMM subgraphs that can
benefit from a variant of Sum that performs multiplication instead of addition,
potentially saving dozens of % of E2E VRAM compared to regular binary_mul which
inevitably requires an RHS buffer that should exist in VRAM beside DST.

## Options

There are several approaches to adding an implicit multiplication post-op:

> 1. Add a new one-off Sum-like post-op.

Reviewer 2: I'd like to add another option for consideration, that is to extend supported algorithms with a new in-place binary_mul that would only be allowed as a post-op.

As I understand, what OV needs is in-place binary_add (already covered by the sum post-op) and in-place binary_mul, both with f16 inputs. A new binary algorithm like binary_mul_inplace could fit here, since it should be able to reuse the existing binary_mul machinery/introduce no new API and enable exactly what was requested. As far as I could tell we have pretty tight checks of what is allowed (e.g. in binary primitive), so this new algorithm won't unexpectedly leak into any context other than post-op where it would be explicitly allowed.

As for the rest of the options, my concern is that we would be making broad changes with no evidence that they are actually needed, and every new API comes with a maintenance cost. Plus based on the discussion it seems like more generic options would require careful clarifications in the docs regarding what is (un)supported and exactly how it works. There is currently no evidence that we need any other in-place binary (that is what Option 3 could give), and new attribute (Option 4) is an even more complex addition since it covers every post-op (existing and any future ones) and, as it was mentioned, could be silently lost when post-ops are copied to a nested primitive, so decoupling post-op information and storing some in the attr and the rest in the post-op doesn't seem safe overall.

So my preference is to narrow the new feature to what is requested (unless we have a good understanding or justification of what else might be useful, in this case please updated RFC with this info) and to introduce something small that is enough for current needs, that is for instance a new in-place binary_mul algorithm.

Author: @mzhukova I like the idea, added it to the RFC as Option 5. It is effectively the per-post-op flag in another guise, and that carries one material advantage over Option 4: the information lives in the post-op entry itself, so there is nothing outside it to propagate into nested primitives manually, no attributes to lose by accident. I'm also wary of losing bits of important information on post-ops stored outside of the post-ops they govern.

Option 5 also disposes of the redundant-`src1_desc` question @densamoilov raised: with the algorithm itself implying DST as the RHS, the descriptor is fully determined and can be resolved from DST, so potentially it even survives the null RHS MD.

What bothers me is the cost of that path. We would be adding values to `alg_kind_t` that make no sense outside post-ops, so the enum ends up carrying values that begin with `binary_*` but are not, in fact, general Binary algorithms. With one `binary_*_inplace` algorithm that's tolerable (in the same vein as e.g. `binary_select` that adds a new op instead of constraining the existing ones — which also happens with `binary_mul` vs. `binary_mul_inplace`); at the second such addition onwards, though, it'd start looking like Option 1's duplication just moved up a level. It also doesn't extend to PReLU, or anything other than a Binary for that matter; those would need new post-op kinds, not new alg kinds.

Overall, I'm fine with Option 5 deliberately setting the scope to the cases requested, if it's acceptable that every further in-place algorithm we can potentially add in the future is its own quasi alg kind, and all post-ops that are not `binary_t` are out of scope; the latter might actually be a good thing, as it spares the library a large testing surface for a capability that would be nominally supported but unused.

Author: One correction to what I wrote above — and to the concern in your original comment about the attribute being silently lost when post-ops are copied to a nested primitive. I went looking for an implementation where that happens today, and there isn't one; more info [here](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3847693130). So the advantage I claimed for Option 5 is prospective rather than present, and should carry less weight in the comparison than my previous comment implied.

    it is not carried along when they are. Where a parent primitive nests
    several *different* sub-primitives that need *different* attributes, those
    attributes are not cloned from the parent: each is constructed empty and
    filled with whatever that sub-primitive needs. The flag then defaults to
    absent, and a sub-primitive writing to the parent's DST is free to use it
    as intermediate storage — which is exactly what the flag exists to forbid.
    The omission is silent: it yields wrong results rather than a rejected
    primitive descriptor. No implementation in the library today is in that
    position (see Implementation), so this is a prospective cost rather than a
    present defect — but a prospective cost with no existing site to copy the
    correct handling from. It is fair to say that attributes already hold
    entries that are lost by copying `post_ops_t` alone, but unlike those, this
    flag is load-bearing for correctness rather than performance. A per-post-op
    flag, on the other hand, carries information no implementation is expected
    to use, since aliasing is a property of the whole post-op chain in practice.

> 5. Add a new algorithm, e.g. `binary_mul_inplace`, only accepted as a post-op.

Reviewer 2: Minor suggestion, I think "inplace" has slightly different meaning overall, maybe we want to just explicitly say `_dst` or `_rhs_dst` instead to make it super clear about what is happening underneath. Otherwise LGTM.

Reviewer 6: +1 for `binary_mul_dst`

Reviewer 2: @hidefromkgb could you please change name as suggested? and resolve the thread afterwards, thanks!

`dnnl_post_ops_append_binary()` and its C++ equivalent. An in-place Binary is a
regular Binary post-op in every respect but one — its right-hand side is the
destination buffer, and the algorithm kind is what says so.

From a semantical standpoint, this is how an in-place Binary differs from the
regular ones:

```
ACC = ACC + RHS — binary_add
ACC = ACC × RHS — binary_mul
ACC = ACC / RHS — binary_div
…
ACC = ACC + DST — Sum
ACC = ACC × DST — binary_mul_inplace
```

— where DST is the destination buffer, ACC is the accumulator register block
within the primitive, and RHS is the separate right-hand-side buffer used in
regular Binary post-ops.

Keep in mind that DST is not intended to get rewritten until after all post-ops
are applied, so for primitives' implementations where that cannot be guaranteed,
there should be either no support for in-place post-ops or some memory movement
to guard the DST data against the intermediate writes.

The post-op buffer that aliases DST — the one described by `user_src1_desc` —
must be declared with a memory descriptor that equals that of `DNNL_ARG_DST` in
shape and in data type. Its layout has to match DST as well, but it need not be

> spelled out: declaring it as `format_kind::any` is both allowed and preferable

Reviewer 6: A suggestion: can we allow an empty descriptor in this case? Could be nice for users to allow this shortcut since `src1_md` descriptor is redundant.

`desc.dst_desc`, straight from the user, so DST itself may well be `any` at this
point, and admitting a concrete operand layout against an unresolved DST would
leave it unverified for good, since the implementation picks DST's layout
afterwards and nothing revisits the post-op.
`memory_desc_wrapper::similar_to()`, which compares dims, strides and blocking,
holds for no descriptor of format kind `any` by documented design, which is why
it sits under that implication rather than being called outright. The data type
and the dimensions are compared unconditionally.

No such check would be available under [4]: an attribute saying that some
post-op may alias DST leaves no entry to validate against DST to begin with.

Since the algorithm determines the operand, the Binary MD is redundant:
everything about it follows from DST. It is kept because doing so costs no new
API, because the existing `append_binary()` requires it anyway, and because it
is where a later relaxation of the type rule would live.

What remains a contract on the user is the buffer itself. Being a regular Binary
post-op, an in-place Binary still takes its right-hand side at execution as

> `DNNL_ARG_ATTR_MULTIPLE_POST_OP(idx) | DNNL_ARG_SRC_1`, and the library has no

Reviewer 2: I think we could just not require passing a memory object in this case, this would mean updating the part where we compute number of expected args for the execution based on primitive descriptor, but this way we would only need to compare src1 md with dst md upon creation, and no special handling would be required for the execute.

reliable way to tell whether the handle it is given is in fact DST. Passing

> anything else there is undefined behavior.

Reviewer 6: Disallowing `src1` argument in this case is a good option, as @mzhukova suggested.

However, in the worst case, if we have to require the user to pass this argument, we can still validate at execution time and report an error in case of a mismatch - the UB is avoidable.

Reviewer 2: @hidefromkgb let's close on this and https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/pull/5740#discussion_r3883218367  discussions before finalizing implementation, and ensure no open threads left and RFC is merged. Thanks!
